We've covered an awful lot of ground in this
particular lecture, so let's summarise some
of the most important points.
In the last lecture, we considered a very
simplistic control case. We called it independent
joint control and we ignored facts like gravity,
but in a real robot such as the PUMA robot,
shown here in this particular configuration,
we can imagine the torque that must be required
at the shoulder joint and at the elbow joint in order to stop the robot collapsing under the effect of gravity.
So this was the robot joint control we had
for the independent control case and we modified
that. We introduced the disturbance torque,
and this might be due to non-linear friction
or it might be due to gravity. This is the
disturbance force TD.
And then we looked at the effect that the
disturbance torque has on the joint position
and it can be significant, so it's something
that we need to deal with.
We then considered a very simple case: a single
motor attached to a link, and the link has
got mass. If a joint is controlled by a PD
controller, a pretty typical sort of controller
for a robot joint, then we saw that the effect
of gravity is to deflect the joint, introducing
a positioning error. The joint angle is not
the desired joint angle. And the amount of
that error is inversely proportional to the
controller gain P, so if we want to make the
error very small, we need to use a very high
gain. But we saw that there is some consequences
with increasing the gain, in particular, increased
overshoot in our joint control system.
So another strategy that we looked at then
is to introduce an integral term. This is
a term that ramps up while there is a positioning
error, increasing the torque in the joint
until the error is eliminated.
Another strategy we looked at is feedforward
control. And here, we assume that we can estimate
the disturbance torque and in the case of
gravity, that's most certainly the case. So,
we estimate what gravity should be and multiply
it by a gain and introduce it into the output
of our controller, and that cancels out the
actual disturbance.
This is a technique that works well even if
our estimate is not too precise. Partial cancellation
of disturbance is better than no cancellation
at all.
Next we considered the dynamic parameters
of a serial link manipulator.
We've looked at this simple robot earlier when we were studying kinematics.
Now we want to understand the dynamics of this.
So we've indicated the center of mass of each
of the links, and we described the position
of the center of mass of each link with respect
to the link coordinate frame and the inertia
of each link. The mass is a scalar, the position
of the center of mass is a three-element vector,
and the inertia is a three by three matrix,
it's a symmetric matrix, so it actually has
only six unique elements. So each link is
therefore described by ten dynamic parameters.
The dynamics of moving bodies is described
by a number of mathematical techniques. And
we used a combination of Newton's second law,
F equals MA and Euler's equation for rotational
motion. Together, we call this a Newton-Euler
method.
And we then described a very efficient computer
algorithm, the recursive Newton-Euler algorithm,
which we can use in MATLAB to compute joint
talks as a function of Q, Q dot, and Q double dot.
We didn't go into the details of the recursive
Newton-Euler method. You can find the details
in many textbooks and you can look at the
code provided with Toolbox.
The expressions for robot joint talk as a
function of Q, Q dot, and Q double dot are
actually quite complicated but they can be
factorised and expressed in a very concise
matrix equation. So the torque applied to
the joint comprises an inertial term, a Coriolis
and centripetal term and gravity term. We
then spend a little bit of time investigating
in detail each of these terms.
When it comes to control of a particular robot
joint, things are much more complicated than
they were in the independent joint control
situation. Then, we had only to deal with
the first two terms. Now we have to deal with
torques that are due to acceleration of all
the other robot's joints, the velocity of
all the robot's other joints, and the influence of gravity.
With some mathematical manipulation, we can
get this down to a fairly concise equation,
which looks like this. And the bottom line
is that the inertia of the robot joint is
a function of the configuration of the entire
robot, it's no longer a constant.
We have the viscous friction term and we have
the disturbance torque term, which is due
to acceleration and velocity of all the other
robot's joints. Time varying inertia is a
bit of a problem because it makes it hard
to tune the control system to get the best
possible settling time and overshoot.
The disturbance torque means more work for
the joint controller. It has to be very high
performance so that it can reject the disturbance
torque and perform accurate path following.
Some techniques to help eliminate these rigid
body dynamic effects other introduce a gearbox.
It reduces the configuration-dependent inertia,
which makes the inertia almost independent
of robot configuration and it greatly attenuates
the disturbance torque. A gearbox is a cheap
trick and most robots include a gearbox anyway
to amplify the torque of high-speed electric motors.
We can also apply a computational technique
called torque feedforward control or computed
torque control. Effectively, what we're doing
here is trading mechanical complexity and
cost - for instance, the addition of a gear
box - with computation. The computation is
getting cheaper and cheaper year on year.
We can rearrange the rigid body equations
of motion into this form. We can get an expression
for Q dot dot - the join acceleration - in
terms of the torque that I applied to a robot.
I can integrate the acceleration to get velocity,
integrated again to get position, and now
what I have is the forward dynamics of the
robot manipulator. This is a function which
gives me the motion of the robot as a function
of torque. And this is really useful when
I want to simulate the robot motion in a real
world setting with a controller that I design.